--- PAGE 371 ---
363
Canada
ey.com/GlobalTaxGuides
Calgary
GMT -7
EY 
2200 – 215 2nd Street SW 
Calgary AB, AB T2P 1M4 
Canada
Indirect tax contact
	 Thomas Brook	
+1 (416) 943-2117 
	 	
thomas.brook@ca.ey.com
Montreal
GMT -5
EY 
900 De Maisonneuve Blvd. W  
Suite 2300 
Montreal, QC H3A 0A8 
Canada
Indirect tax contacts
	 Jadys Bourdelais	
+1 (514) 879-6380 
	 	
jadys.bourdelais@ca.ey.com
	 Jean-Baptiste Congy	
+1 (514) 879-8079 
	 	
jb.congy@ca.ey.com
Toronto
GMT -5
EY 
P.O. Box 251 
Ernst & Young Tower 
Toronto, Ontario M5K 1J7 
Canada
Indirect tax contacts
	 Sania Ilahi	
+1 (416) 941-1832 
	 	
sania.ilahi@ca.ey.com
	 Sylvain Golsse	
+1 (416) 932-5165  
	 	
sylvain.golsse@ca.ey.com
	 Jan Pedder	
+1 (416) 943-3509 
	 	
jan.s.pedder@ca.ey.com
	 Tariq Nasir	
+1 (416) 932-6143 
	 	
tariq.nasir@ca.ey.com
	 David Robertson	
+1 (403) 206-5474 
	 	
david.d.robertson@ca.ey.com
A. At a glance
Name of the tax	
Goods and services tax (GST) 
 	
Harmonized services tax (HST)
Local name	
Goods and services tax (GST) 
 	
Harmonized services tax (HST)


--- PAGE 372 ---
364  Canada
Date introduced	
1 January 1991 
 	
1 April 1997
Trading bloc 
 membership	
United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA)  
	
Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific 
	
 Partnership  
	
Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA), 
	
 between the European Union and Canada and currently 
	
 provisionally in force
Administered by	
Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) (https://www.canada.ca/en/ 
	
 services/taxes.html)
Sales tax rates 
  GST standard	
5% 
  HST standard 
    Ontario	
13% 
    New Brunswick	
15% 
    Newfoundland and 
     Labrador	
15% 
    Nova Scotia	
14% 
    Prince Edward Island	
15%
  QST standard 
    Québec	
9.975% 
  PST standard 
    British Columbia	
7% 
    Manitoba	
7% 
    Saskatchewan	
6% 
  Other	
Zero-rated (0%) and exempt
GST/HST number format	
15 characters (9 numeric/2 alpha/4 numeric)
GST/HST return periods	
Monthly, quarterly, annual 
Thresholds 
  Registration	
CAD30,000
Recovery of GST or HST 
 by non-established 
 businesses	
No
B. Scope of the tax
Canada’s federal government imposes a 5% sales tax known as the goods and services tax (GST). 
When a supply is made in a “participating province,” the tax rate includes an additional provin-
cial component of 8%, 9% or 10%, depending on the province. The combined 13%, 14% or 
15% tax is known as the harmonized sales tax (HST).
In implementing the HST, the participating provinces repealed their individual retail sales taxes 
and share the revenues generated by the HST. HST applies to the same base of goods and ser-
vices that are subject to GST.
Although the province of Québec is not considered a “participating province,” it replaced its own 
retail sales tax and eventually harmonized with the GST (subject to some exceptions) after it 
initially implemented its own Québec sales tax (QST) on 1 July 1992.


--- PAGE 373 ---
Canada  365
The provinces of British Columbia, Manitoba and Saskatchewan continue to impose their own 
retail sales tax (provincial sales tax [PST]), while the province of Alberta and Canada’s three ter­
ritories do not impose a retail sales tax.
GST/HST applies to taxable supplies of property and services while doing business in Canada 
and to imports of goods into Canada. Specific HST rules determine when a supply is made in a 
participating province and when property or services are brought into a participating province.
The term “property” includes all property, whether real or personal, movable or immovable, 
tangible or intangible, corporeal or incorporeal, any right or interest of any kind, and shares and 
“choses in action” (i.e., personal rights to property). However, it does not include money. The 
term “tangible personal property” generally means goods.
The term “services” means anything other than property or money. It does not include services 
provided by an employee in the course of, or in relation to, an office or employment.
For the purposes of GST/HST, the territory of Canada includes the following areas:
•	The seabed and subsoil of the submarine areas adjacent to the coast of Canada for which the 
government of Canada or of a province may grant rights to explore for, or exploit, any minerals 
(including petroleum, natural gas, related hydrocarbons, sand and gravel).
•	The seas and airspace above those submarine areas with respect to any activities carried on in 
connection with the exploration for, or exploitation of, minerals.
The legislation contains rules that determine whether a supply has been made in Canada for GST 
purposes. Once it is determined whether a supply is made inside Canada or outside Canada under 
these GST place-of-supply rules, there is a similar but separate set of rules (known as HST place-
of-supply rules) that determines whether the supply is made in a particular province in Canada.
Under the legislation, a sale of goods is deemed to be made in Canada if the tangible personal 
property (i.e., goods) is delivered or made available to the purchaser at a place in Canada. Any 
other supply of goods (otherwise than by way of sale), such as a lease, is deemed to be made 
either inside Canada or outside Canada depending on whether possession or use of the goods is 
given to the recipient or is made available to the recipient inside Canada or outside Canada. 
A service is deemed to be supplied in Canada if the service is performed in whole or in part in 
Canada. It is deemed to be supplied outside Canada only if the service is performed wholly out­
side Canada. A supply of intangible personal property is deemed to be made in Canada if the 
property may be used in whole or in part in Canada. Conversely, a supply is deemed to be made 
outside Canada if the property cannot be used in Canada.
Effective use and enjoyment. To avoid instances of non-taxation or double taxation, jurisdictions 
can apply “use and enjoyment” rules that allow a service that is “used and enjoyed” in the juris-
diction to be taxed or prevent a service that is “used and enjoyed” outside the jurisdiction from 
being taxed. If a service is taxed in the jurisdiction under the “use and enjoyment” provisions, a 
non-established supplier of the service may be required to register for GST/HST in every juris-
diction where it has customers that are not taxable persons. In Canada, no services are subject to 
the “use and enjoyment” provisions.
Transfer of a going concern. Normally the sale of the assets of a GST/HST-registered or 
GST/HST-registrable business will be subject to GST/HST at the appropriate rate. However, a 
transfer of a business as a going concern (TOGC) may be outside the scope of the tax under 
certain conditions. A TOGC is the sale of a business or part of a business capable of separate 
operation including assets. Where the sale meets the conditions, the supply is treated as outside 
the scope of GST/HST. In Canada, for a TOGC to be treated as outside the scope of GST/HST, 


--- PAGE 374 ---
366  Canada
the supplier and the recipient must make a joint election using Form GST44. To be eligible to 
make the election the following conditions must be met: 
•	A supplier (the vendor) makes a supply of “a business” or “part of a business.”
•	The business (or part) was carried on by the vendor.
•	The recipient (the purchaser) is acquiring ownership, possession or use of “all or substantially 
all” of the property that can reasonably be regarded as being “necessary” for the purchaser to 
be capable of carrying on the business (or part) as a business (i.e., generally referred to 
90% or more).
•	The purchaser is registered for GST/HST where the vendor is registered for GST/HST. The 
election can also be made if both the vendor and the purchaser are non-registrants, or if the 
vendor is a non-registrant and the purchaser is a registrant.
•	The vendor and the purchaser make a joint election in prescribed form.
•	The purchaser files the election with the fiscal authorities no later than the due date for the 
return for the purchaser’s first reporting period in which any of the GST/HST would have been 
payable.
Transactions between related parties. Closely related corporations and partnerships engaged 
exclusively in commercial activities may elect to deem supplies made between members of the 
group as being made for no consideration. See the subsection Group registration below. A simi-
lar election is available for corporations that are members of a closely related group that contains 
listed financial institutions. When the election is made, the electing corporations are deemed to 
be listed financial institutions and all supplies of property by lease or license and all supplies of 
services between the electing corporations are deemed supplies of financial services (exempt 
supplies for GST/HST purposes). 
C. Who is liable
Every person who makes taxable supplies of goods or services through commercial activity in 
Canada is required to register for GST/HST purposes. “Commercial activity” means any of the 
following activities:
•	Any business, except to the extent the business involves making exempt supplies
•	An adventure in the nature of trade, except to the extent the activity involves making exempt 
supplies
•	The supply of real property, other than an exempt supply
For individuals, personal trusts whose members are individuals and partnerships of individuals, 
the activity must also be carried on with a reasonable expectation of profit to constitute a com-
mercial activity.
Crypto asset mining activity. Canada has enacted rules (retroactive to 5 February 2022) for the 
application of GST/HST to mining activities in respect of crypto assets and to remuneration 
received for performing such activities. A crypto asset mining activity includes the following:
•	Validating transactions and adding them to the publicly distributed ledger on which the crypto 
asset exists at a digital address
•	Maintaining and permitting access to the publicly distributed ledger on which the crypto asset 
exists at a digital address
•	Allowing computing resources to be used in connection with the activities described above
In general, crypto asset mining is not considered a supply for GST/HST purposes. For example, 
a person that acquires a property or service for consumption, use or supply in the person’s cryp­
to asset mining activities is deemed to have done so otherwise than in the course of the person’s 
commercial activities. As a result, GST/HST does not apply to the provision of crypto asset min-
ing and the person performing the mining cannot claim input tax credits (ITCs). However, the 
general GST/HST rules may apply if certain conditions are met (e.g., a particular person 


--- PAGE 375 ---
Canada  367
performs a mining activity for another person and the identity of that other person is known to the 
particular person).
Exemption from registration. The following are activities that are exceptions from requiring to 
register for GST/HST purposes:
•	The person qualifies as a “small supplier.”
•	The person’s only commercial activity is the supply of real property by way of sale other than 
in the course of a business.
•	The person is a nonresident who does not carry on any business in Canada.
The definition of a “person” includes individuals, partnerships, corporations, trusts, estates of 
deceased individuals and bodies such as societies, unions, clubs, associations, commissions or 
other organizations of any kind.
A “registrant” is any person that is registered or is required to be registered for GST/HST under 
Subdivision d of Division V of the Excise Tax Act.
Voluntary registration and small businesses. In addition to mandatory registration requirements, 
other persons engaged in commercial activities in Canada may apply for registration even if not 
required to do so under the legislation.
Small supplier threshold. A “small supplier” is a person whose annual worldwide taxable and 
zero-rated supplies were less than CAD30,000 in the four preceding calendar quarters. The 
CAD30,000 threshold is determined by reference to the aggregate of taxable and zero-rated sup-
plies made by the person and any associates of the person in the period.
A person whose activities exceed CAD30,000 must register for GST/HST within one month after 
making the first supply that causes its turnover to exceed the threshold. However, if a person 
exceeds the CAD30,000 threshold in a single calendar quarter, it ceases to qualify as a small 
supplier beginning with the supply that causes it to exceed the threshold.
The small supplier threshold for a public service body (i.e., charity, nonprofit organization, 
municipality, university, public college, school authority or hospital authority) is generally 
CAD50,000.
The small supplier rules do not apply to the following businesses:
•	Persons who solicit orders for publications to be delivered in Canada by mail or courier
•	Persons who are registered under the “Electronic Commerce” provisions of the Excise Tax Act 
Section 148(3) (see the Digital economy subsection below)
•	Taxi operators (including commercial ride-sharing services)
•	Nonresidents who sell taxable supplies of admissions in Canada for places of amusement, 
seminars, activities or events held in Canada
Persons engaged in selling real property (under taxable conditions) otherwise than in the course 
of a business may also register, though they are not required to do so under the legislation. Reg­
istration permits these persons to claim ITCs on land purchases at the time of purchase instead 
of at the time of sale, resulting in significant cash flow advantages.
Other voluntary registrations. Registration is also permitted in the case of a resident parent cor-
poration that has no commercial activity but holds a related corporation’s shares or debt deemed 
to be property that was last acquired or imported by the parent for use exclusively in the course 
of commercial activities. Also permitted is the registration of resident corporations that are 
acquiring or propose to acquire all or substantially all the capital stock of another corporation.
Listed financial institutions resident in Canada are also permitted to apply for registration. Vol­
untary registration is also available to foreign banks in certain circumstances, as part of measures 
introduced to assist foreign banks to restructure under the foreign bank branching regime in the 


--- PAGE 376 ---
368  Canada
Bank Act. These measures provide transitional GST/HST relief for the initial transfer of assets 
from a foreign bank’s existing Canadian subsidiary to its newly established Canadian branch.
A corporation (the particular corporation) may also register for GST/HST purposes if it receives 
a supply of property made in contemplation of a distribution made in the course of a reorganiza-
tion in which the shares of the particular corporation are to be transferred upon the distribution 
to one or more transferee corporations, and the property received by the particular corporation 
meets certain conditions. Specifically, the supplied property must include property that is neither 
a financial instrument nor property having a nominal value. The consumption, use or supply of 
the property before and after the supply must be exclusively in the course of commercial activi-
ties. 
The minister of national revenue is not required to register every person who applies for registra-
tion and is authorized to deny registration in appropriate cases.
Group registration. GST/HST group registration is not permitted. Legal entities that are closely 
connected must register for GST/HST individually.
However, “closely related” corporations and partnerships may elect to deem supplies made 
between members of the group as being made for no consideration if the members are engaged 
exclusively in making taxable and zero-rated supplies. This provision effectively makes sales 
between group members subject to the zero rate. Taxable sales of real property and any supply 
that is not acquired by the recipient exclusively for use in a commercial activity are not eligible 
for relief under the election.
This election has been amended to allow a group of corporations and partnerships, each closely 
related to the other, to constitute a qualifying group, even if a partnership in the group has a 
member that is a corporation or a partnership that is not resident in Canada. However, there is no 
change to the previous requirement that any member of a qualifying group that makes the elec-
tion must be a corporation resident in Canada or a partnership, each member of which is resident 
in Canada. 
Special rules apply if a closely related group includes a financial institution. See the subsection 
Transactions between related parties above. 
Closely related corporations and Canadian partnerships are required to file prescribed election 
Form RC4616 with the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA). 
There is no minimum time period required for the duration of a GST group. It is based on the 
degree of share ownership (as outlined below).
Changes to the definition of a “qualifying member” resulted in a general increase in the avail-
ability of the election for new members of a qualifying group. However, in the case of new mem­
bers, the election is available if it is expected the new member of the group will be exclusively 
engaged in commercial activities throughout the 12-month period following the time when the 
election is made. 
The prescribed form for the election in Québec is numbered FP-4616-V.
In addition to meeting a 90% or more ownership test based on the value and number of voting 
shares, for the parent and the subsidiary to be considered to be closely related, the parent corpo-
ration or partnership must hold and control 90% or more of the votes in respect of every corpo-
rate matter (i.e., the qualifying voting control) of the subsidiary corporation.
All parties to the election are jointly and severally, or solidarily (for civil law purposes), liable 
for tax (and penalties) that may apply in relation to supplies made among them. Liability applies 
even where the election had ceased to be in effect before the time the particular supply was made, 
but the parties conducted themselves as if the election were in effect at the time the supply was 


--- PAGE 377 ---
Canada  369
made. Liability also applies where no valid election had been made, but the parties claimed they 
had made an election and were conducting themselves as if an election were in effect at that time.
Participants in certain joint ventures may make a joint election under which one of the partici-
pants (the operator) is responsible for accounting for GST/HST on all purchases and sales made 
by the participants through the operator. The 2023 Fall Economic Statement proposed amend-
ments to the rules that would allow more participants in commercial joint ventures to access the 
simplification benefits of the joint venture election. However, the 2025 Federal Budget tabled on 
4 November 2025 indicated that the federal government will not proceed with these proposals.
Fixed establishment. Generally, where a nonresident has a permanent establishment (PE) in Can­
ada, the person is deemed to be resident in Canada regarding the activities carried on through 
that particular establishment. Every nonresident person deemed resident in Canada and engaged 
in commercial activity (i.e., the business of making taxable and zero-rated supplies) in Canada 
through that particular establishment is generally required to register for GST/HST. A PE, in res­
pect of a particular person, is defined for GST/HST purposes as a fixed place of business of the 
person, including a place of management, branch, office, factory, workshop, mine, oil or gas 
well, quarry, timberland or other place of extraction of mineral resources through which supplies 
are made. In addition, the PE of a person includes the fixed place of business of another person 
(other than a broker, general commission agent or other independent agent) making supplies on 
behalf of the person in the ordinary course of business. 
Based on the above, for a person to have a PE under the first part of the definition, the person 
must both have a fixed place of business and make supplies through that fixed place of business, 
or under the second part of the definition, have a person (other than a broker, general commission 
agent or other independent agent acting in the ordinary course of business) making supplies 
through a fixed place of business in Canada.
Non-established businesses. A nonresident business that does not carry on business in Canada 
but solicits orders for the supply of goods in Canada or enters into an agreement to supply certain 
goods, services or intangible property in Canada, may register on a voluntary basis to be eligible 
to claim ITCs (see section F. Recovery of GST/HST by taxable persons). A nonresident business 
is not required to appoint a tax representative in Canada to register for GST/HST. However, a non­
resident business with no PE in Canada must provide a security deposit to the GST/HST author-
ities to obtain registration.
In general, the amount of security is 50% of the estimated net tax (either positive or negative) for 
the first year of operations in Canada. The minimum acceptable amount of security is CAD5,000, 
and the maximum is CAD1 million. Security may be in the form of cash, certified check, money 
order or bond. All security deposits are payable in Canadian dollars (CADs).
A nonresident business may apply in writing to have the security requirement waived if it satis-
fies both of the following conditions:
•	Its taxable supplies in Canada do not exceed CAD100,000 annually.
•	Its net GST remittance or refund does not exceed CAD3,000 annually.
Tax representatives. A nonresident business is not required to appoint a tax representative in Can­
ada to register for GST/HST. Form-AUT-01 is used to authorize the CRA to deal with an individ­
ual representative (such as an accountant, lawyer or employee) or a firm as a representative for 
business account-related GST/HST information (as well as payroll, corporation income taxes, 
excise taxes, excise duties and other levy accounts). A representative is required to complete the 
authorization request in “Represent a Client” at https://www.canada.ca/en/revenue-agency/services/­
e-services/represent-a-client.html to obtain online access to tax information for a business. 
Reverse charge. Self-assessment of the GST or federal component of the HST is required on 
importations of intangible personal property and services that are acquired from unregistered, 


--- PAGE 378 ---
370  Canada
nonresident persons outside Canada and not used at least 90% in commercial activities (100% in 
the case of financial institutions). The tax is calculated on the amount charged for the service or 
intangible personal property in CADs, and the tax is payable in the reporting period in which the 
amount for the service or the intangible personal property was paid or became payable. Reg­
istered purchasers of real property are also required to self-assess and remit applicable tax on the 
consideration paid for the property. 
Domestic reverse charge. There are no domestic reverse charges in Canada. However, in accor-
dance with the 2025 Federal Budget tabled on 4 November 2025, the federal government is 
proposing changes to address “carousel fraud” by introducing a new reverse-charge mechanism 
(RCM), beginning with certain supplies in the telecommunications sector. Under the proposed 
rules, suppliers will not be required to collect GST/HST payable on the supply of specified tele-
communication services. Rather, GST/HST registered recipients will be required to self-assess 
and report the tax payable in their GST/HST return, and if entitled, they will be eligible to claim 
an input tax credit in the same return. At the time of preparing this chapter, these changes have 
not been finalized and are still in the proposal stage.
Digital economy. Nonresident vendors supplying digital products and services to consumers in 
Canada are required to register for, collect and remit GST/HST with respect to their taxable sup-
plies to Canadian consumers. Similar requirements apply to supplies of short-term accommoda-
tion made through digital accommodation platforms, as well as to goods supplied through 
fulfillment warehouses, as outlined below. 
Under these measures, a nonresident vendor is required to register for, collect and remit the 
GST/HST if the vendor’s total taxable supplies of digital products or services made to consumers 
in Canada exceed or are expected to exceed CAD30,000 over a 12-month period. These measures 
also apply to a nonresident distribution platform operator if the operator’s total taxable supplies 
of digital products or services made to consumers in Canada, including the supplies of digital 
products or services by nonresident vendors to consumers in Canada that the operator facilitates, 
exceed or are expected to exceed that threshold. For purposes of this measure, a consumer is an 
entity or person not registered for GST/HST and a business is any other entity or person regis-
tered for GST/HST.
A nonresident vendor or nonresident distribution platform operator that does not carry-on busi-
ness in Canada may register under a simplified system allowing them to use a specific online 
portal for simplified GST/HST collection and remittance. Under the simplified system, they are 
required to collect and remit GST/HST for supplies made to consumers, but not for supplies to 
a registrant. Also, they may not claim ITCs to recover GST/HST paid on business inputs. 
However, a nonresident vendor or nonresident distribution platform operator may claim ITCs if 
that person registered in accordance with the regular GST/HST rules.
These rules apply to cross-border supplies of digital products and services to the extent the con-
sideration for such supplies becomes due on or after 1 July 2021 or is paid without becoming 
due. Also effective on the same date, distribution platform operators are required to register 
under the normal GST/HST rules and to collect and remit the GST/HST for sales of goods that 
are located in fulfillment warehouses in Canada (or shipped from a place in Canada to a pur-
chaser in Canada) when those sales are made by non-registered vendors through distribution 
platforms. Moreover, nonresident vendors are required to register under the normal GST/HST 
rules and to collect and remit the GST/HST for sales of goods that are stored in fulfillment 
warehouses in Canada when nonresident vendors make such sales on their own account.
Registration requirements apply to both resident and nonresident distribution platform operators 
if their total qualifying supplies of tangible personal property to purchasers in Canada, including 
supplies made through their platforms by third-party vendors, exceed or are expected to exceed 
CAD30,000 over a 12-month period.


--- PAGE 379 ---
Canada  371
GST/HST is required to be collected and remitted in respect of supplies of short-term accom-
modation made through a digital accommodation platform. A property owner who is a registrant 
is required to account for GST/HST on such supplies. If the property owner is not a registrant, 
the accommodation platform provider is deemed to have made the supply and is responsible for 
GST/HST collection and remittance.
GST/HST registration is required for an accommodation service provider if that person facili-
tates or expects to facilitate more than CAD30,000 in taxable supplies of short-term accommoda-
tion in Canada for unregistered third-party suppliers of the accommodation. An accommodation 
service provider that carries on business in Canada continues to be subject to the regular GST/­
HST registration regime. Nonresident accommodation platform operators that do not carry-on 
business in Canada may register under a simplified system allowing them to use a specific online 
portal for simplified GST/HST collection and remittance. Under the simplified system, they are 
required to collect and remit GST/HST for supplies of short-term accommodation made to con-
sumers (defined to be a person not registered for GST/HST) but not for supplies to a registrant. 
Persons registered under the simplified system may not claim ITCs to recover GST/HST paid on 
business inputs.
Initially, the CRA used the same number pattern for both regular and simplified GST/HST reg-
istrations. Because there was only one number pattern for both types of registration, there was a 
risk that Canadian businesses could claim undue ITCs. Effective 30 June 2023, the last four 
digits have been altered to visibly identify registrants under the simplified regime. The updated 
number should be used for reporting periods after 30 June 2023.
Québec specified registration system. Prior to the introduction of the federal e-commerce mea-
sures outlined above, Québec implemented a mandatory specified registration system for suppli-
ers with no physical or significant presence in Québec (nonresident suppliers) to ensure the QST 
is collected and remitted in the context of the digital economy. Suppliers with no physical or 
significant presence in Québec are required to collect and remit the QST on taxable incorporeal 
movable property and services they supply in Québec to specified Québec consumers (i.e., per-
sons who are not QST registrants and whose usual place of residence is in Québec).
Mandatory registration applies to digital property and services distribution platforms with res­
pect to taxable supplies of incorporeal movable property or services supplied to specified Québec 
consumers, where the digital platform controls the key elements of transactions with such con-
sumers, such as billing, transaction terms and conditions, and delivery terms. The specified reg­
istration system took effect on:
•	1 January 2019: for nonresident suppliers outside Canada and for digital platforms enabling 
these suppliers to make taxable supplies of incorporeal movable property or services in Québec 
to specified Québec consumers
•	1 September 2019: for nonresident suppliers in Canada and for digital platforms enabling these 
suppliers to make taxable supplies of incorporeal movable property or services in Québec to 
specified Québec consumers
Nonresident suppliers who are required to register under the specified system may elect to reg-
ister under the general QST system instead if they meet the optional registration requirements 
under the QST system. A nonresident supplier who makes this election is also required to regis-
ter for GST/HST.
Online marketplaces and platforms. In addition to the supplies in relation to the digital economy, 
nonresident (for tax purposes) suppliers located in Canada are required to collect and remit the 
QST on taxable corporeal movable property (goods) they supply in Québec to specified Québec 
consumers. This mandatory registration applies to nonresident suppliers if the value of the con-
sideration for all taxable supplies made by the supplier in Québec to consumers is greater than 
CAD30,000.


--- PAGE 380 ---
372  Canada
Canada has adopted the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
model rules developed for reporting by digital platform operators on platform sellers. As a result, 
reporting platform operators providing support to reportable sellers for relevant activities will be 
required to file annual reports with the CRA indicating the jurisdiction of their reportable sellers. 
Under the model rules, reporting platform operators are entities that are engaged in the follow-
ing:
•	Contracting directly or indirectly with sellers to make the software that runs a platform avail-
able for the sellers to be connected to other users
•	Collecting compensation for the relevant activities facilitated through the platform 
Reporting platform operators include platform operators that are resident for tax purposes, or 
nonresident platform operators that facilitate relevant activities by sellers resident in Canada or 
with respect to renting real property located in Canada. Reportable sellers include active users 
that are registered on a platform to perform relevant activities. Certain sellers that represent a 
limited compliance risk, such as government entities, are excluded. Relevant activities include 
relevant services (e.g., services involving time or task-based work, rental of real property, rental 
of transportation) and sales of goods.
Reporting platform operators must report specified information on reportable sellers by 
31 January of the year following the calendar year for which a seller is identified as a reportable 
seller. These measures apply to calendar years beginning after 2023. The first reporting deadline 
under the new rules for digital platform operators was 31 January 2025 for the 2024 calendar 
year. 
QST harmonization – Cross-border digital products and cross-border services. The federal mea-
sures that took effect 1 July 2021 essentially reflect the specified QST system that requires 
nonresident suppliers, as well as operators of specified digital platforms facilitating the transac-
tions of such suppliers, to register with Revenu Québec and to collect and remit the QST appli-
cable to their taxable supplies of incorporeal movable property and services made to Québec 
consumers.
Québec has amended its tax legislation to avoid any difference in harmonization between the 
QST and GST/HST systems that may result from the implementation of the federal measures 
relating to cross-border digital products and cross-border services, e.g., the rules relating to cal-
culating the CAD30,000 threshold. These amendments are intended to ensure that the provisions 
concerning the specified QST registration and remittance system, applicable to nonresident sup-
pliers and distribution platform operators, are harmonized with the federal legislation. As well, 
they are intended to ensure that QST is collected on the sale of goods from outside Canada from 
a warehouse in Québec and on the supply of short-term accommodations situated in Québec that 
are rented through digital accommodation platforms. The amendments to the Québec tax legisla-
tion are effective 1 July 2021. 
QST harmonization – Goods supplied through fulfillment warehouses. Québec has amended its 
tax legislation to incorporate the federal measures for supplies of goods made through fulfillment 
warehouses. As a result, distribution platform operators and nonresident vendors are similarly 
required to register under the normal QST rules and to collect and remit QST, in respect of sales 
of goods located in fulfillment warehouses in Québec or shipped from a place in Québec to a 
consumer in Québec. Fulfillment businesses in Québec are also required to notify Revenu Qué­
bec that they are carrying on a fulfillment business and to maintain records on their nonresident 
clients and the goods they store on their behalf. Furthermore, the specified QST system is 
amended to ensure the collection and remittance of QST on sales of goods located in fulfillment 
warehouses in Canada but outside Québec, as well as on sales of goods shipped from a place in 
Canada but outside Québec, when such sales are made to Québec consumers.


--- PAGE 381 ---
Canada  373
QST harmonization – Platform-based, short-term accommodation. Québec has incorporated the 
GST/HST measures in respect of supplies of short-term accommodation facilitated by a digital 
platform operator.
Registration procedures. Persons required to register under the legislation must apply to the CRA 
within 30 days following the first taxable supply made in Canada. Registration can be done 
online (https://www.canada.ca/en/revenue-agency/services/tax/businesses/topics/gst-hst-busi-
nesses/account-register.html) or by mail or online. To register, the following information must be 
provided:
•	Amount of annual worldwide and domestic GST/HST taxable supplies
•	Fiscal year-end
•	Effective date of registration
•	Reporting period
•	Business name
•	Business number (if the business already has one – see below)
•	Type of business or organization (such as sole proprietor, partnership, corporation, registered 
charity)
•	Incorporation date, jurisdiction and certificate number, if applicable
•	Name and Social Insurance Number of all owners
•	Physical address
•	Mailing address (if different from the physical address)
•	Description of major business activity
Before registering for GST/HST (or during the process of registering), a business must obtain a 
business number (BN) from the CRA by using its online service (https://www.canada.ca/en/
revenue-agency/services/tax/businesses/topics/business-registration/business-number-program-
account/how-register.html); by sending a completed Form RC1, Request for a Business Number 
(BN); or by calling +1 800 959 5525.
The agency will then assign a registration number to the registrant and provide notification in 
writing of the registration number and the effective date of registration. Organizations can gener-
ally expect to receive confirmation of their registration and their nine-digit registration number 
by mail within two weeks after submitting their completed registration forms (however, the 
processing time may be longer for nonresident entities). GST/HST registrants who are based in 
the province of Québec are required to register with Revenu Québec using the online service 
(https://www.revenuquebec.ca/en/businesses/consumption-taxes/gsthst-and-qst/registering-for-
the-gst-and-qst/how-to-register/).
Deregistration. Where a person ceases to carry on a commercial activity or becomes a small sup-
plier and, as a result, ceases to be a registrant, the person’s GST/HST registration may be can-
celed by the CRA on its own initiative or on request. In these circumstances, the person is 
deemed to have sold all its assets at fair market value upon deregistration. The non-registrant is 
subsequently required to account for the GST/HST on this deemed disposition in the last 
GST/HST return as a registrant. The person must also repay any ITCs claimed on prepaid rent 
and services to the extent the prepayments relate to a period after deregistration.
Conversely, tax that becomes payable by a person to suppliers after deregistration continues to 
qualify as a valid ITC where it relates to services rendered to the person before deregistration or 
to rental payments attributable to a period before deregistration.
Changes to GST/HST registration details. When certain changes occur, registrants are required to 
inform the CRA so that the changes can be reflected in their GST/HST account. These include 
changes to a business address and/or operating name, as well as changes to fiscal year-ends, legal 
status, business activity, ownership, directors, etc. Also, the CRA should be notified if any of the 
following events occur: amalgamation, purchases of another business, opening more locations or 


--- PAGE 382 ---
374  Canada
branches, selling a business, bankruptcy or receivership, among others. Depending on the type 
of change that occurs, the CRA should be contacted by mail, phone or fax. In certain cases, reg­
istrants can make the changes online (https://www.canada.ca/en/revenue-agency/services/tax/
businesses/topics/changes-your-business.html).
D. Rates
The term “taxable supplies” refers to supplies of goods and services that are subject to GST/HST. 
The HST applies at the rate of 13% applies in Ontario, 14% in Nova Scotia, and 15% in 
New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, and Prince Edward Island. QST (see 
section B. Scope of the tax) at a rate of 9.975% applies in the province of Québec. The effective 
combined GST/QST rate is 14.975%.
Nova Scotia reduced the provincial component of its HST from 10% to 9% effective 1 April 2025, 
resulting in a new combined HST rate of 14%. The Regulations Amending Various GST/HST 
Regulation, No. 14 (Nova Scotia), which  were published in the Canada Gazette on 
26 March 2025, provide transitional rules to determine the rate applicable to transactions strad-
dling the 1 April 2025 implementation date. 
The 5% GST rate applies to supplies of property and services made elsewhere in Canada: in the 
provinces of British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba and in the Yukon, North­
west, and Nunavut Territories. A zero-rate (0%) applies to a limited range of supplies of prop-
erty and services. Although tax does not apply to zero-rated supplies, a registrant may claim ITCs 
with respect to these supplies. As a result, zero-rated supplies bear no tax.
Examples of goods and services taxable at 0%
•	Exports of goods and services
•	Basic foodstuffs
•	International transportation
•	Prescription drugs
•	Medical devices
•	Certain inputs used in agriculture and fishing
Certain supplies of goods and services, referred to as “exempt supplies,” are within the scope of 
GST/HST, but are not liable to tax. However, these exempt supplies do not give rise to ITCs.
Examples of exempt supplies of goods and services
•	Supplies of used residential property
•	Financial transactions
•	Most supplies by charities and public-sector bodies
•	Health care services
•	Education services
Option to tax for exempt supplies. In some cases, the GST/HST legislation permits parties to a 
transaction to elect to treat certain exempt supplies as taxable. Elections are available, for exam­
ple, in respect of the supply of a residential complex by a person other than a builder, particular 
sales of real property by an individual when made in the course of an adventure or concern in the 
nature of trade, certain supplies of instruction or examinations by a professional or trade asso-
ciation, government, vocational school, university, public college or regulatory body, certain 
memberships in a public service body or professional organization and some supplies of real 
property by public service bodies. In most cases, conditions must be satisfied before the election 
can be made.


--- PAGE 383 ---
Canada  375
E. Time of supply
In general, tax on a taxable supply becomes payable on the earlier of the date on which the con-
sideration for the supply is paid or the date on which the consideration becomes due. The con-
sideration is considered to be paid when the supplier receives the money (or other form of agreed 
consideration) for the supply. The consideration for a taxable supply is deemed to become due 
on the earliest of the following dates:
•	The date on which the supplier issues an invoice with respect to the supply
•	The date of the invoice
•	The date on which the consideration falls due under a written agreement
•	If an undue delay occurs in the issuance of an invoice for services, the date on which the sup-
plier would have issued an invoice with respect to the supply, but for the delay
Tax may also become due when the supply is completed in specific circumstances. For example, 
tax on a sale of real property generally becomes due on closing. Similarly, if goods are sold, any 
tax on the supply that has not previously become due becomes due at the end of the month fol-
lowing the month when the goods are delivered to the purchaser.
Deposits and prepayments. A deposit may be defined as money placed with a person as security 
or guarantee for the due performance of a contract. Most deposits are not treated as consideration 
under the legislation but are regarded as pools of money that become taxable only when applied 
as consideration for a supply or when forfeited for failure to carry out the agreement under which 
the supply is made. However, a prepayment of the purchase price is taxable when it is paid or 
becomes due. In practice, the distinction between a deposit and a prepayment is often difficult to 
draw because the consequences of a default by the person paying the deposit or making the pre-
payment can be the same.
As a general rule, there is no difference between goods or services regarding the time of supply 
rules for deposits and prepayments.
Continuous supplies of services. Special rules apply to water, electricity, natural gas, steam or any 
other property where it is delivered or made available to the purchaser on a continuous basis by 
means of a wire, pipeline or other conduit, provided invoices are issued to the purchaser on a 
regular or continuous basis. Thus, most sales by utilities are taxable when invoiced. However, 
some industrial products that are delivered to commercial and industrial purchasers by pipeline 
are invoiced irregularly on an as-needed basis. In these circumstances, the vendor must collect 
tax by the end of the month following the month of delivery.
Goods sent on approval for sale or return. Goods are often delivered to prospective purchasers on 
approval, sale or return, consignment or other similar terms. Under these arrangements, title to 
the goods generally does not pass to the purchaser until the purchaser notifies the seller of its 
approval or acceptance of the goods, or the purchaser commits some act or default that indicates 
its adoption of the sale. In these circumstances, the legislation requires that tax be paid no later 
than the end of the calendar month following the month in which the goods are resold or title to 
the goods passes to the purchaser.
Reverse-charge services. Generally, tax is applied to imported services or intangible property (or 
to commercial imports made by importers who are not entitled to ITCs, as well as on specified 
motor vehicles) where the supply is made outside Canada to a person who is resident in Canada, 
unless the supply is exempt or zero-rated, or the Canadian resident is acquiring the property or 
service for use exclusively in the course of commercial activities.
Leased assets. The legislation provides that where a written lease has been entered into, each 
lease payment is regarded as becoming due on the day on which the lease requires the payment 


--- PAGE 384 ---
376  Canada
to be made, even if an invoice for the payment is issued before the payment becomes due. Thus, 
tax applies to each payment of rent under the lease as it becomes due or, where rent is prepaid, 
on the day the prepayment is made. This rule applies to leases of both real property and tangible 
personal property, but not to other agreements.
Imported goods. Goods imported into Canada are subject to the GST or the federal part of the 
HST, except for goods that would be zero-rated if supplied in Canada, which are also zero-rated 
upon importation. Tax on imported goods becomes due when the goods are released by the 
Canada Border Services Agency for entry into Canada.
F. Recovery of GST/HST by taxable persons
A registrant (taxable person) may recover the GST/HST payable on property and services that it 
acquires or imports for consumption or for use or supply in its commercial activities. This is 
accomplished by claiming ITCs as a deduction on the registrant’s GST/HST return.
A valid tax invoice or customs document must generally be obtained before an ITC may be 
claimed.
A registrant generally claims its ITCs in the GST/HST return for the reporting period in which 
the tax becomes payable. However, a registrant may claim an ITC for a previous period at a later 
date. 
The time limit for a taxable person to reclaim input tax in Canada is four years. Recovery is 
generally possible in any return filed within four years after the end of the reporting period in 
which the tax became payable. The recovery period is reduced to two years for certain large busi-
nesses (more than CAD6 million in annual taxable supplies) and listed financial institutions. 
However, large businesses whose supplies of goods and services are all or substantially all 
(90% or more) taxable in either of their last two fiscal years are excluded from this two-year 
limitation. 
Nondeductible input tax. The provinces of British Columbia, Ontario and Prince Edward Island 
each adopted temporary restrictions on certain ITCs for large businesses when they adopted the 
HST, similar to those that were formerly in place under the QST regime. These temporary restric-
tions no longer apply, with Prince Edward Island being the last province to phase them out, 
effective 1 April 2021.
For purposes of the temporary recapture rules, a person was generally deemed to be a large busi-
ness if either of the following conditions were met:
•	The total amount of the value of the consideration for taxable supplies (including zero-rated 
supplies) made annually in Canada (other than supplies of financial services and supplies aris-
ing from the sale of real properties that are capital properties of the person) by the person and 
its associated persons exceeded CAD10 million in the last fiscal year that ended before a recap­
ture period.
• 	The person was, or was related to, a bank, a trust company, a credit union, an insurer, a segre-
gated fund of insurers or an investment plan.
For purposes of the temporary recapture rules, specified property or services generally included 
the following, with minor differences among the provinces:
•	Specified energy
•	Specified telecommunication services
•	Specified road vehicles
•	Specified fuel (other than diesel)
•	Specified food, beverages and entertainment


--- PAGE 385 ---
Canada  377
In the province of Québec, the restrictions on ITCs for large businesses were eliminated gradu-
ally, beginning in 2018. Restrictions were completely phased out effective 1 January 2021.
ITCs may not be recovered to the extent that an input is used in making exempt supplies.
The number of ITCs that may be recovered is based on the extent to which the input is used for 
consumption or for use or supply in commercial activities. Special rules apply to capital goods 
and capital real property. ITCs may not be claimed for purchases of property and services that 
are not used for business purposes (e.g., goods acquired for private use by an entrepreneur or an 
officer or shareholder of a company). If an item is used less than 10% for business purposes, no 
recovery is permitted. In addition, ITCs may not be recovered for some items of business expen-
diture.
The following lists provide examples of items of expenditure for which ITCs may not be claimed 
and examples of items for which ITCs are available if the expenditure is related to use to taxable 
business use.
Examples of items for which input tax is nondeductible
•	Purchases used less than 10% in commercial activities
•	Membership fees for social clubs
•	50% of business meals and entertainment costs
•	Gifts to employees (subject to exceptions)
Examples of items for which input tax is deductible 
(if related to a taxable business use)
•	Hotel accommodation
•	Attending conferences and seminars
•	Purchase, lease (or hire) of cars, vans or trucks, subject to certain limits
•	Maintenance and fuel for cars, vans or trucks
•	Parking
•	Mobile phones
Partial exemption. Tax paid on inputs related to making exempt supplies is generally not recover-
able as an ITC. A GST/HST registrant that makes both exempt and taxable supplies may be limit­
ed to claiming a partial ITC.
The amount of ITCs that a business engaged partially in exempt activities may claim is calcu-
lated in the following two stages:
•	The first stage identifies the tax on inputs that may be directly and exclusively allocated to 
taxable supplies and the tax on inputs that may be directly and exclusively (90% or more) allo-
cated to exempt supplies. Tax on inputs exclusively attributable to taxable supplies is eligible 
for full ITCs. Tax on inputs exclusively related to exempt supplies is generally not recoverable.
•	The second stage apportions tax on other inputs between taxable and exempt supplies, based 
on any method that is fair and reasonable in the circumstances and consistently used. The pro-
portion that relates to commercial activities may be claimed as an ITC.
Approval from the tax authorities is not required to use the partial exemption standard method or 
special methods in Canada. However, large banks, insurers and securities dealers could be 
required to either use a prescribed percentage to recover ITCs or obtain preapproval from the 
CRA to use a customized ITC allocation method provided certain conditions are met.
Capital goods. Although registrants are generally entitled to claim ITCs in full at the time assets 
are acquired, special rules apply to certain capital goods. Generally, these rules apply to goods 
defined to be capital property, other than real property, of the registrant within the meaning of 
the Income Tax Act (referred to as capital personal property), as discussed below. ITCs are avail-
able at the time of acquisition to the extent an asset is primarily for use in a commercial activity. 


--- PAGE 386 ---
378  Canada
Certain subsequent changes in the proportion of commercial use over the life of the asset may 
trigger adjustments in GST/HST.
For GST/HST purposes, capital property includes any property that is capital property for income 
tax purposes, other than property included in Class 12, 14 or 44 of the capital cost allowance 
classes. Capital property for income tax purposes is defined as any depreciable property (i.e., 
property on which capital cost allowance may be claimed) and any property, such as land, shares, 
bonds, debentures and mortgages, that if disposed of would result in a capital gain or loss. Class 
12 includes low-value assets (e.g., small tools, dishes, cutlery and motion picture films) for 
which a 100% write-off for income tax purposes is allowed, while Class 14 includes franchises, 
concessions and licenses for a limited period. Class 44 includes patents and rights to use patent­
ed information for a limited or unlimited period. The definition of capital property for GST/HST 
purposes applies to a registrant whether or not the registrant is a taxable person for income tax 
purposes.
The GST/HST status of the disposition of capital personal property generally depends on its use 
immediately prior to its disposition. GST/HST applies if the most recent use was primarily in 
commercial activity, since, presumably, an ITC would have been taken.
Proportional ITCs are available for acquisitions of capital real property, even where the property 
is not used primarily in a commercial activity. However, they are not available where the prop-
erty is acquired primarily for the personal use and enjoyment of the registrant. Change-of-use 
rules apply if significant shifts occur in the mix of noncommercial and commercial usage.
Special rules also apply in the case of capital personal property and capital real property used by 
public sector bodies.
Refunds. If the ITCs claimed in a period exceed the amount of GST/HST collected or collectible 
in the same period, the registrant may claim a refund. An invoice or other supporting document 
containing prescribed information is necessary to support a claim for an ITC, refund or rebate. 
Where a document contains a combination of taxable and zero-rated or exempt items, the tax 
status of each must be shown if the document is to support an ITC claim. A statement that “prices 
include GST/HST where applicable” is not sufficient.
Pre-registration costs. When a person who was formerly a small supplier, i.e., with annual sales 
of taxable and zero-rated supplies below CAD30,000, becomes a registrant for GST/HST pur-
poses, can claim an ITC for the GST/HST it paid on property that was previously acquired but 
still on hand for use in commercial activities. This property can include capital property, real 
property, goods for resale and inventory. The GST/HST that can be claimed as an ITC at that time 
is equal to the basic tax content of the property.
An ITC may also be claimed for GST/HST that became payable before a person became a 
GST/HST registrant, on services to be rendered after the person becomes a registrant or on any 
rent, royalty or other similar payment relating to property that is attributable to a period after the 
person becomes a registrant. The ITC is available only to the extent that the service or rental is 
for consumption, use or supply in the course of a commercial activity. No ITC is allowed to the 
extent that the payment is for services provided before registration.
Bad debts. The legislation provides relief for tax charged but not collected in the case of bad 
debts incurred by a supplier, to the extent these debts are subsequently written off. Specifically, 
the formula in the legislation provides that the deduction is equal to the tax payable in respect of 
the supply multiplied by the ratio of the total amount of the bad debt written off (including 
GST/HST and applicable provincial taxes) to the total amount payable for the supply (including 
GST/HST and applicable provincial taxes). This relief is not available for bad debts in respect of 


--- PAGE 387 ---
Canada  379
which an accounting reserve has been established. The debt must be written off in the books of 
account to access the relief.
Noneconomic activities. Input tax incurred in relation to noneconomic activities is not recover-
able in Canada.
G. Recovery of GST/HST by non-established businesses
Input tax incurred by non-established businesses that are not registered for GST/HST in Canada 
is not recoverable.
H. Invoicing
GST/HST invoices. Strict documentary requirements must be satisfied before a claim can be made 
to recover tax that has been paid or become payable. Suppliers are required to provide this infor-
mation on request.
Credit notes. If a registrant has collected an excess amount of tax, it may refund or credit the 
excess amount to the customer. A registered supplier has up to two years after the day on which 
it was charged or collected to refund or credit the excess tax. If the supplier chooses to take this 
action, the supplier must, within a reasonable time, issue a credit note to the recipient for the 
refund or credit.
If the supplier has already accounted for GST/HST on the supply, the supplier may use the 
credit note to reduce its tax liability in the period in which the credit note is issued. Conversely, 
if the recipient of the supply has already recovered the tax by claiming an ITC or rebate, the 
recipient must repay the credit or rebate to the CRA.
Similar tax adjustment measures also apply if tax has been charged or collected correctly by the 
supplier, but the consideration is subsequently reduced for any reason. Both volume discounts 
and returns are treated as price adjustments for GST/HST purposes.
Electronic invoicing. Electronic invoicing is allowed in Canada, but not mandatory. 
Scope of electronic invoicing. For B2B, B2C and business-to-government (B2G) supplies, elec-
tronic invoicing is allowed but not mandatory in Canada. There is no threshold beyond which 
taxable persons are required to adopt electronic invoicing in Canada. The requirements related to 
electronic invoicing are the same as those for paper invoicing. If electronic invoicing is used, the 
general rules pertaining to invoices under the legislation must be followed. 
The CRA has launched a multiyear initiative to explore the adoption of electronic invoicing 
standards and technology for integration with the Canadian tax system. The aim of this initiative 
is to (i) assess how electronic invoicing can benefit businesses through efficiencies, (ii) improve 
sales tax compliance, (iii) deter participation in the underground economy and (iv) improve the 
taxpayer experience. Specifically, the CRA aims to advance thinking as to how tax compliance 
can include the use of real or near real-time data from business transactions using modern tech-
nologies, as opposed to relying on taxpayer completed tax returns and post-filing strategies. 
Canada helped prepare the OECD report, Tax Administration 3.0 and Electronic Invoicing: Initial 
Findings.
It should be noted that in Quebec, all restaurant establishments that are QST registrants and sub­
ject to mandatory billing, must submit transaction data to Revenu Québec using a certified sales 
recording system designed to communicate with the MEV-WEB, a cloud-based tax data collection 
system. Quebec has implemented similar measures for the remunerated passenger transportation 
sector (e.g., conventional taxis and ride-sharing services).


--- PAGE 388 ---
380  Canada
Simplified GST/HST invoices. Simplified GST/HST invoicing is allowed in Canada. Invoice require­
ments are based on the value of the supply. For supplies less than CAD100, the only pieces of 
information required on supporting documents are the vendor’s name or trading name, sufficient 
information to identify when GST/HST in respect of the supply was paid or became payable and 
the total consideration paid or payable for the supply.
For supplies greater than CAD100 but less than CAD500, three additional pieces of information 
are required. These are the vendor’s GST/HST registration number, the total amount of GST/HST 
charged on the supply or, if prices are on a tax-included basis, a statement to this effect and an 
indication of which items are taxed at the GST rate and which are taxed at the HST rate.
For supplies greater than CAD500, additional information is required. These are the purchaser’s 
name, trading name or the name of their duly authorized representative; sufficient information to 
ascertain the terms of sale (e.g., cash, credit); and a description sufficient to identify the supply.
The 2021 federal budget proposed to increase the existing thresholds to CAD100 (from CAD30) 
and CAD500 (from CAD150). Amendments to increase the thresholds were included in 
Bill C-59, Fall Economic Statement Implementation Act, 2023, which received royal assent on 
20 June 2024. However, the increased thresholds are deemed to have come into force on 
20 April 2021. 
Self-billing. Self-billing is allowed in Canada. This is only if the recipient provides the supplier 
with the prescribed information that the supplier would otherwise have the obligation to indicate 
on its invoice.
Proof of exports. In general, GST/HST does not apply to exported goods. If the supplier delivers 
the goods outside Canada, the transaction is treated as a supply outside Canada and is generally 
not taxable.
The CRA has indicated that several documents may constitute adequate evidence of export. The 
required documents in a particular case may vary, depending on the mode of transportation used 
to export the goods and the nature of the goods. The acceptability of the documentary evidence 
depends on whether the CRA can retrace the entire shipment of the property from its origin in 
Canada to the point at which the shipment leaves Canada. The necessary documentation may 
include:
•	Purchase agreements or billings from the supplier to the recipient that identify the goods
•	Transportation documents (bill of lading, waybill, probill, post office receipt, courier 
receipt, etc.) showing the point of delivery
•	Customs brokers’ invoices relating to the supply
•	Import documentation required by the country of destination
In the case of motor vehicles, boats, ships and aircraft, copies of the registration from the foreign 
regulatory authority where the property has been licensed may also be used to establish that the 
property has been exported.
Customs Form B13A, Export Declaration, alone, is not acceptable as proof of export. For further 
information, see GST/HST Memorandum 4.5.2, Exports – Tangible Personal Property, 
Appendix: Evidence of exportation.
Foreign currency invoices. Suppliers may invoice in foreign currency and recipients may make 
payments to suppliers in foreign currency. If an invoice is issued in a foreign currency, it must be 
converted to CADs for reporting purposes (except under the simplified system for e-commerce 
where it is possible to file in US dollars or euros under certain conditions). In general, the Cana­
dian currency equivalent may be determined by using the exchange rate in effect on the date on 
which the consideration for the supply is paid, the date on which the foreign currency was 


--- PAGE 389 ---
Canada  381
acquired or the average rate of exchange for the month in which tax became payable. Acceptable 
foreign currency exchange rates include those established by a Canadian chartered bank, the 
Bank of Canada or the Canada Border Services Agency. The method of conversion chosen by a 
registrant must be applied on a consistent basis.
Supplies to nontaxable persons. GST/HST-registered suppliers are not required to issue full GST/
HST invoices to private (non-GST/HST-registered) customers. The documentary requirements 
are only in place for supplies made to GST/HST-registered customers, for them to be allowed the 
input GST/HST recovery.
Records. In Canada, examples of what records must be held for GST/HST purposes include rec­
ords and books of account for GST/HST audit purposes. The records must generally be kept in 
French or English.
In Canada, GST/HST books and records can be kept outside the country. Records are generally 
required to be held at the person’s place of business in Canada. However, the agency may permit 
a registrant to keep their records outside Canada in certain cases. To request permission, regis-
trants should write to their tax services office. After conducting a review, the CRA will respond 
in writing indicating whether permission is granted and what, if any, terms and conditions apply. 
Where permission to maintain records outside of Canada is given, the records must be made 
available in Canada for review by the CRA upon request. Otherwise, the registrant must allow 
CRA officials to review the records by traveling to the country where they are maintained at the 
expense of the registrant.
Record retention period. Generally, electronic and other records must be retained for six years 
from the end of the calendar year to which they relate or for such longer period as may be pre-
scribed by the regulations. However, the minister may authorize a person to dispose of its records 
before the normal retention period has expired or demand that it keeps them for a longer period. 
The authorization or demand must be made in writing.
Electronic archiving. Electronic archiving is allowed in Canada. Persons using electronic records 
must retain all business records in an electronically readable format, and the data must be capable 
of relating back to the supporting source documents. 
I. Returns and payment
Periodic returns. Reporting periods are monthly, quarterly or annually, depending on the level of 
taxable and zero-rated supplies made by the registrant. 
Registrants whose turnover exceeds CAD6 million a year must file returns monthly.
Registrants with turnover between CAD1.5 million and CAD6 million a year must file returns 
quarterly (with the option of filing monthly). Registrants with turnover less than CAD1.5 million 
must file annually (with an option of filing monthly or quarterly).
Any registrant has the option of filing returns monthly, even if revenue from taxable and zero-
rated supplies is less than CAD6 million.
Nonresident vendors or nonresident distribution platform operators registered under the simpli-
fied system for e-commerce must file on a quarterly basis.
The filing deadline for a monthly or quarterly return is one month after the end of the 
reporting period. The filing deadline for an annual return is generally three months after the end 
of the fiscal year. Specific filing requirements apply for certain listed financial institutions 
(e.g., the deadline can be six months after the end of the year) and individual registrants who 
carry on a business.


--- PAGE 390 ---
382  Canada
Periodic payments. The payment deadline for GST/HST due is the same as the filing deadlines. 
As such, the payment deadline for a monthly or quarterly return is one month after the end of the 
reporting period. The payment deadline for an annual return is generally three months after the 
end of the fiscal year. Specific payment requirements apply for certain listed financial institu-
tions (e.g., the deadline can be six months after the end of the year) and individual registrants 
who carry on a business.
Payments must be made in CADs (except under the simplified system for e-commerce where it 
is possible to pay in US dollars or euros under certain conditions). Payments may be made in 
various ways, including electronically through CRA’s website, in person or through a financial 
institution’s internet or telephone banking system, or by mailing a check or money order. 
In contrast to the rule that deems a return to be filed when it is mailed, a tax remittance is regard­
ed as having been paid only when it is received by the receiver general. If a person makes their 
payment or remittance through a financial institution, the CRA is not considered to have received 
the payment until the financial institution processes the transaction.
Payments and remittances of CAD10,000 or more must be made to the account of the receiver 
general at or through a bank, credit union, trust company or mortgage lender. Also, such pay-
ments must be made electronically unless the payer or remitter cannot reasonably pay the amount 
in that manner. Recent legislative amendments introduced the electronic remittance 
requirement and reduced the threshold for mandatory payments made at or through a financial 
institution from CAD50,000 to CAD10,000. These changes apply for payments and remittances 
made after 2023.
Electronic filing. Electronic filing is mandatory in Canada, for certain taxable persons. 
The legislation allows a person who is required to file a GST/HST return to file returns elec-
tronically if the person meets the criteria specified in writing by the minister. There are four elec­
tronic filing options that can be used to file GST/HST returns, based on a registrant’s particular 
reporting circumstances:
•	GST/HST NETFILE is a free, internet-based filing service that allows eligible persons with a 
four-digit access code to file their returns directly with the CRA over the internet.
•	GST/HST Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) is a computer-to-computer exchange of informa-
tion in a standard format. Eligible registrants can use EDI to file their returns and remit their 
GST/HST payments electronically.
• GST/HST Internet File Transfer (GIFT) is an option that allows eligible registrants to utilize 
third-party, CRA-approved accounting software to file their returns electronically.
• GST/HST Telefile allows eligible registrants to file GST/HST returns using their four-digit 
access code, a touch-tone telephone and the toll-free number +1 800 959 2038.
Also, certain persons are specifically required to file their returns electronically using the media 
specified in writing by the minister in GST/HST Memorandum 7.5, Electronic Filing and Pay­
ment. The following persons must electronically file their GST/HST returns in respect of report-
ing periods that begin before 2024:
•	Registrants, other than charities, with greater than CAD1.5 million in annual taxable supplies 
(calculated by reference to the registrant and all associated persons)
•	Registrants required to recapture ITCs for the provincial portion of the HST on certain inputs 
in Ontario and effective 1 April 2013, in Prince Edward Island
	 Or
•	Builders (including builders that are charities) that:
–	 Sell grandfathered housing, where the purchaser is not entitled to claim a GST/HST new 
housing rebate or GST/HST new residential rental property rebate
–	 Sell housing that is subject to HST when it was purchased on a grandfathered basis


--- PAGE 391 ---
Canada  383
–	 Are required to report a transitional tax adjustment amount
–	 Are reporting a provincial transitional new housing rebate
	 Or
–	 Apply for the GST/HST new housing rebate on behalf of a purchaser, pay or credit the pur-
chaser with the rebate and claim that amount as a deduction from net tax on a GST/HST 
return
Nonresident vendors or nonresident distribution platform operators registered under the simpli-
fied system for e-commerce are also required to file their returns electronically.
As noted above, registrants with greater than CAD1.5 million in annual taxable supplies are 
required to file returns electronically for reporting periods that begin before 2024. Mandatory 
electronic filing thresholds for registrants (other than charities or selected listed financial institu-
tions) have been eliminated for reporting periods beginning after 2023. As a result, most 
GST/HST registrants are now required to file returns electronically (i.e., not just those with 
annual taxable supplies exceeding CAD1.5 million).
Payments on account. Payments on account are not required in Canada.
Special schemes. Small businesses. The Streamlined Accounting (GST/HST) Regulations set out 
several methods that eligible small businesses as well as eligible public service bodies may elect 
to use for calculating their net tax liability. These methods, which are intended to simplify the 
calculation of net tax, are:
•	The quick method
•	The special quick method for public service bodies
•	The streamlined ITC method
Charities that are registered or required to be registered for GST/HST purposes are required to 
use the special net tax calculation for charities method.
Annual returns. Annual returns are not required in Canada.
Supplementary filings. Financial institutions. Financial institutions are required to file an annual 
information schedule, Form GST111, Financial Institution GST/HST Annual Information Return. 
No other supplementary filings are required in Canada. In general, this filing requirement 
applies to financial institutions with notably total annual revenue exceeding CAD2 million. 
This threshold has increased from CAD1 million to CAD2 million for fiscal years ending after 
9 August 2022. 
E-commerce. Certain persons must file information returns with the specified GST/HST regime 
applicable to e-commerce supplies (see the subsection Digital economy above). An accommoda-
tion platform operator that facilitates supplies of short-term accommodation in Canada must file 
an annual information return concerning the accommodation providers making sales through the 
platform. Similarly, a distribution platform operator that is a GST/HST registrant and that facili-
tates supplies of goods through a digital platform is required to file an annual information return 
concerning the vendors making sales through the platform. 
Canada has adopted the OECD model rules developed for reporting by digital platform operators 
on platform sellers (see the subsection Online marketplaces and platforms above). As a result, 
the CRA has indicated that neither accommodation platform operators nor distribution platform 
operators are required to file annual information returns until further notice.
Correcting errors in previous returns. Generally, if an error is made in a previous return but the 
required adjustment would produce an increase in ITCs, with no corresponding increase in the 
tax collected for the same period (i.e., where there would be a decrease in the net tax payable for 
the period), an amended return should not be filed. In this case, the adjustment to increase the 
ITC should be made on the return for the next reporting period. There is an exception to this rule 


--- PAGE 392 ---
384  Canada
in the case of recaptured ITCs where excess amounts were recaptured, and the excessive recap-
ture must be adjusted. If these recapture errors or any other mistakes are caught by the taxable 
person and involve an increase in the net tax payable for a reporting period, refiling of the 
GST/HST return should be considered.
In Québec province, taxable persons must submit a prescribed form to amend a previously filed 
QST return. For registrants based outside of Québec, there is no prescribed form to file. Instead, 
a letter should be faxed to the local CRA tax center of the registrant (i.e., the tax center where 
returns are normally filed). This letter should indicate the registrant’s business number, the 
reporting period being amended, the correct amounts that should have been filed (by line num-
ber), and a name and contact number of a person who may be contacted regarding the adjust-
ments if needed. This letter must be signed by an authorized representative. The CRA will also 
accept amendments to previously filed returns through the My Business Account online portal.
The tax authorities are not obliged to accept amended returns, and the amended return remains 
subject to audit. In addition, where an error is identified that could require the submission of 
amended returns for multiple periods, the use of a voluntary disclosure should be considered to 
minimize applicable interest and penalties and ensure that all appropriate adjustments are made. 
The CRA has made significant changes to the Voluntary Disclosures Program (VDP), effective 
for VDP applications received on or after 1 October 2025. The new policy aims to make the VDP 
more accessible by improving the process of disclosing unintentional errors or omissions by tax-
able persons. Key changes include the removal of the “Limited” and “General” program catego-
ries, replaced by “Unprompted” and “Prompted” applications:
•	General relief (Unprompted application): Taxable persons and registrants who submit a VDP 
application without receiving prior communication from the CRA about an identified compli-
ance issue related to the disclosure may qualify for 75% relief of applicable interest and 100% 
relief of applicable penalties. An application made following receipt of an education letter or 
notice offering general guidance related to a particular topic will be considered unprompted.
•	Partial relief (Prompted application): Taxable persons and registrants who submit a VDP 
application following communication from the CRA about an identified compliance issue 
related to the disclosure may qualify for 25% relief of applicable interest and up to 100% relief 
of applicable penalties.
The VDP continues to provide relief for applications involving GST/HST “wash transactions” 
that qualify for reduced penalties and interest under GST/HST Memorandum 16-3-1, Reduction 
of Penalty and Interest in Wash Transaction Situations. For further information about the revised 
VDP, see GST/HST Memorandum 16.5-1, Voluntary Disclosures Program (applications received 
on or after 1 October 2025).
Digital tax administration. There are no transactional reporting requirements in Canada. 
J. Penalties
Penalties for late registration. Every person who is engaged in a commercial activity in Canada 
(other than a small supplier, a person whose only commercial activity is the making of supplies 
of real property by way of sale other than in the course of a business or a nonresident person who 
does not carry on any business in Canada) is required to apply to be registered for the GST/HST 
before the 30th day after the day the person first makes a taxable supply in Canada otherwise 
than as a small supplier.
A person who is required to apply to be registered is also required to collect and remit the 
GST/HST on taxable sales whether or not the person is registered. Interest is payable at the pre-
scribed rate where a person fails to remit or pay an amount on account of tax when required under 
the GST/HST legislation.


--- PAGE 393 ---
Canada  385
Penalties for late payment and filings. If a person fails to pay or remit an amount of tax when due, 
interest (at a rate prescribed by law) is payable on the amount unpaid or not remitted. Interest is 
compounded daily.
A person who fails to file a return when required is liable to pay a penalty equal to 1% of the 
outstanding balance plus 0.25% per month for each complete month the return is outstanding, 
up to a maximum of 12 months.
A person who fails to comply with a demand to file a return for a period or transaction is liable 
to a penalty equal to CAD250.
Payments or remittances of CAD10,000 or more must be made through electronic services pro-
vided by a bank, credit union, trust company or mortgage lender (see the subsection Periodic 
payments above). Failure to comply with this requirement incurs a penalty of CAD100 for each 
infraction. These measures apply in respect to payments and remittances made after 2023.
Penalties for errors. Administrative monetary penalties and criminal offenses apply where 
electronic suppression of sales is used by businesses to modify or delete transaction records with 
a view to hiding sales and evading GST/HST and income taxes.
There are no specific penalties associated with the late notification or failure to notify the tax 
authorities of changes to a taxable person’s GST/HST registration details. For further details, see 
the subsection Changes to GST/HST registration details above.
Penalties for fraud. A person who knowingly, or under circumstances amounting to gross negli-
gence, makes or participates in making a false statement or an omission in returns or other 
documents are liable to a penalty equal to the greater of the following:
•	CAD250
•	25% of the amount of tax owing underdeclared or overclaimed rebate
In addition, tax advisors may be subject to penalties for false statements made for tax purposes. 
These penalties are often referred to as third-party civil penalties and, depending on the circum-
stances, can be substantial.
Personal liability for company officers. Where a corporation fails to remit an amount of net tax as 
required, the directors of the corporation at the time the corporation was required to remit the 
amount are jointly and severally, or solidarity, liable, together with the corporation, to pay that 
amount and any interest or penalties that arise. A director of a corporation may be held liable not 
only for unremitted net GST/HST amounts, but also for net tax refund amounts to which the 
corporation is not entitled.
The legislation does not define the term “director.” Therefore, it is necessary to look to the cor-
poration’s governing legislation, such as the Canada Business Corporations Act or one of the 
provincial counterparts, e.g., the Ontario Business Corporations Act. Where an individual is 
formally appointed or elected as the director of a corporation under such legislation, the indi-
vidual is referred to as a de jure director. However, an individual may also be a director of a 
corporation in fact (referred to as a de facto director) even if not legally appointed or elected to 
the position. The liability of a director generally arises only upon the conclusion of unsuccessful 
collection proceedings against the corporation, the liquidation or dissolution of the corporation, 
or the bankruptcy of the corporation.
An action or proceeding against a director to recover any amount payable must commence 
with­in two years after an individual ceased to be a director of that corporation.
A director is not liable if they have exercised “the degree of care, diligence and skill to prevent 
the failure that a reasonably prudent person would have exercised in comparable circumstances.”


--- PAGE 394 ---
386  Canada
In the case of unincorporated bodies, each officer (not including a partnership, trust or estate) is 
jointly and severally, or solidarity, liable with the body and its other officers to pay and remit the 
taxes and other amounts for which the body became liable while they were an officer. Persons 
who may be liable under this provision include the president, chairperson, treasurer and secretary 
of the body. Where these officers do not exist, any member of a managing committee may be 
held liable. Where a body does not have such officers or a managing committee, liability falls on 
each of the body’s members. As is the case with a director of a corporation, a former officer or 
member of an unincorporated body may not be assessed more than two years after they ceased 
being an officer or member.
In addition to the civil liability discussed above, where a person other than an individual (such 
as a corporation, trust, partnership or unincorporated organization) is guilty of an offense under 
the legislation, every officer, director or agent of the person who directed, authorized, assented 
to, acquiesced in or participated in the commission of the offense is a party to that offense. If 
convicted, the officer, director or agent is liable to the same punishment provided for that offense, 
whether or not the person has been prosecuted or convicted. Under this provision, the liability of 
an officer, director or agent does not absolve the corporation or other body of liability for the 
offense.
Statute of limitations. The statute of limitations in Canada is four or seven years. A GST/HST 
registrant or other person required to file a return for a reporting period may be assessed by the 
CRA for the tax payable or remittable for the period. The assessment must be made within four 
years after the day on which the return for the period is required to be filed. Where the return is 
not filed on time, the assessment may be issued within four years after the day on which the 
return is filed. The same limitation period applies to reassessments. The statute of limitations is 
seven years in some very specific cases. 
Where a taxable person fails to collect tax on a taxable supply in Canada, the minister may assess 
the recipient of the supply for the tax. An assessment or reassessment of a taxable person for this 
tax must be issued within four years after the day on which the taxes became payable.
Generally, an assessment or reassessment of a penalty must be issued within four years after the 
day on which the taxable person became liable to pay the penalty. 
The limitation periods on assessments may be set aside in cases of misrepresentation attributable 
to neglect, carelessness or willful default, or in cases of fraud. This may apply even where there 
has been a voluntary disclosure by the taxable person. Under the voluntary disclosure program, 
an administrative program run by the CRA, the CRA’s policy is to not to prosecute or seek civil 
penalties if a taxable person has disclosed all the facts when no investigation is underway as to 
the taxable person’s liability. 
Under a “stop-the-clock” rule, where requirements for information served to taxable persons or 
compliance orders are contested, the reassessment period is extended while the requirement for 
information or compliance order is contested.
